#summary A technical description of the chimerascan algorithm

= How `chimeracan` works =

The following is a technical description of the algorithm.  Though the software will be updated and improved, we do not anticipate that the steps in the algorithm will change drastically.

== Step 0: Build an index for alignment ==

The `chimerascan_index.py` script included with `chimerascan` is used to prepare an index for alignment (see Installation).  Currently, the Bowtie aligner is used as the primary alignment tool.

== Step 1: Prepare reads for mapping ==

`chimerascan` parses FASTQ files containing the original read sequences and performs the following: 1) converts all quality scores to Sanger format (Phred + 33) and 2) converts the `qname` for the reads from an arbitrarily long string to a number.  Thus, this process essentially creates an identical copy of the original reads and requires considerable disk storage space for large amounts of reads.

== Step 2: Initial read alignment ==

Paired-end reads are aligned to a combined genome and transcriptome reference.  By design this creates many redundant alignments for each read because a single read could align to both the genome and to different transcript isoforms.  Therefore, the alignment process allows for "multimapping" to accommodate this redundancy.

This initial alignment is performed in paired-end mode; both reads in a pair must align within `--min-fragment-length` and `--max-fragment-length` (specified by user). This *must* be substantially larger with the fragment size range chosen during size selection. By default we assume use a fragment length range 0-1000bp and this has worked in our test data sets.

Theoretically, this initial read alignment step could be performed with any alignment tool, but the current version of `chimerascan` supports only `Bowtie` for alignment.

== Step 3: Sorting reads in SAM file ==

A sorted, indexed BAM file is created to enable fast lookup of read alignments by genomic coordinates. This enables downstream analyses of genes and quantitation of transcript abundance. This process can take a considerable amount of time.

== Step 4: Determining empirical distribution of fragment sizes ==

`chimerascan` parses the aligned reads and computes the empirical distribution of fragment sizes.  Only uniquely mapping reads are used to sample the fragment size distribution. The fragment size distribution is used in future steps to help localize fusion breakpoints.

== Step 5: Reads alignment step ==




Therefore, we recommend setting the `--multimaps` option to >40.  We have not exhaustively tested upper bounds for the `--multimaps` flag

Reads are aligned 


in paired-end 

    #
    # Initial Bowtie alignment step
    #
    # align in paired-end mode, trying to resolve as many reads as possible
    # this effectively rules out the vast majority of reads as candidate
    # fusions
    #


and writes them in a 




Reads are simultaneously aligned to both the genome and transcript references.  Therefore, many reads will map to both a t

= Details =

Add your content here.  Format your content with:
  * Text in *bold* or _italic_
  * Headings, paragraphs, and lists
  * Automatic links to other wiki pages






# the pipeline
    # 2) ensure the "/1" and "/2" suffixes exist to denote reads in a pair
    # 3) convert quality scores to sanger format
    # 4) #TODO# trim poor quality reads 
    # (requires support for variable length reads)
    #